config yaml guide updates (#32869)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/config-your-quarkus-applications-using-a-yaml-file_howto.adoc

> ////

Reviewer: @quarkusio/documentation do we really want the URL to be that long? Just wondering.

Reviewer 2: also, it should be -howto, not _howto.

Reviewer 3: Also, do we want to break the old link?

Author: Shortened it to `config-yaml-howto.adoc`. The new Quarkus docs landing page requires the `-howto` extension.

This document is maintained in the main Quarkus repository, and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
[id="configure-a-yaml-application-properties-file"]
= Configure a YAML application properties file
include::_attributes.adoc[]
:categories: core
:summary: Use `application.yaml` instead of `application.properties`.

Optionally, you can use a YAML-formatted file, `application.yaml`, instead of the default `application.properties` file to configure your application.

link:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YAML[YAML] is a popular format.
For example, Kubernetes relies on YAML to write various resource descriptors.

.Prerequisites

* You have installed JDK 11 or later and set the `JAVA_HOME` environment variable to specify the location of the Java SDK.

> * You have installed Apache Maven {maven-version}.

Reviewer: I'm unhappy about that. We have a prerequisites include that we should use for all the guides. If it needs adjustments, I can tweak it but we need to use it everywhere.

Author: Thanks for the reminder. I'm new to the community docs. I'll add this information to the [Contribute to Quarkus documentation](https://quarkus.io/guides/doc-contribute-docs-howto) topic: https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/33227

Author: Updated. Thanks.

// include::modules/con_overview-quarkus-configuration.adoc[leveloffset=+1]
[id="con_overview-quarkus-configuration"]
== Overview

Configuration options enable you to change the settings of your application in a single configuration file.

{project-name} supports configuration profiles that you can use to group related properties and switch between profiles as required.

By default, {project-name} reads properties from the `application.properties` file located in the `src/main/resources` directory.
Instead, you can configure {project-name} to read properties from a YAML file.

> When you add the `quarkus-config-yaml` dependency to your project `pom.xml` file, you can configure and manage your application properties in the `application.yaml` file.

Reviewer: We also support Gradle in Quarkus so we shouldn't refer to `pom.xml` exclusively.

```suggestion
When you add the `quarkus-config-yaml` extension to your project build file, you can configure and manage your application properties in the `application.yaml` file.
```

Author: Updated. Thanks.

> When you add the `quarkus-config-yaml` dependency to your project `pom.xml` file, you can configure and manage your application properties in the `application.yaml` file.

Reviewer 3: I think we should focus only on the YAML Config. Everything else is already documented in the main Config guide.

Author: Thanks for your comments. We discussed and agreed to keep this content.

For more information, see the xref:proc_enabling_yaml_configuration[Enabling YAML configuration].

{project-name} supports YAML configuration files through the `SmallRye Config` implementation of Eclipse MicroProfile Config.

You can use the link:https://microprofile.io/project/eclipse/microprofile-config[MicroProfile Config] specification from the Eclipse MicroProfile project to inject configuration properties into your application and access them using a method defined in your code.

{project-name} can also read application properties from different origins, including the following sources:

* The file system
* A database
* A Kubernetes or OpenShift `ConfigMap` or Secret object

> * Any source that a Java application can load

Reviewer: I fail to see what this has to do with this particular guide?

Reviewer 3: I agree. Plus, we don't want to portray SmallRye Config (or any other SmallRye project) as just an implementation of Eclipse MicroProfile. All of them are way beyond that, so we try to keep the references to MicroProfile to a minimum.

Author: Thanks. I agree. Removed.

// include::modules/proc_enabling_yaml_configuration.adoc[leveloffset=+1]
[id="proc_enabling_yaml_configuration"]
== Enabling YAML configuration

To enable YAML configuration, add the `quarkus-config-yaml` extension:

:add-extension-extensions: quarkus-config-yaml
include::{includes}/devtools/extension-add.adoc[]

You can also just add the following dependency into your project:

[source,xml,role="primary asciidoc-tabs-target-sync-cli asciidoc-tabs-target-sync-maven"]
.pom.xml
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
    <artifactId>quarkus-config-yaml</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

[source,gradle,role="secondary asciidoc-tabs-target-sync-gradle"]
.build.gradle
----
implementation("io.quarkus:quarkus-config-yaml")
----

Remove the `src/main/resources/application.properties` and create a `src/main/resources/application.yaml` file.

NOTE: If both are present, Quarkus prioritizes configuration properties from the YAML file first and then from the
Properties file. However, to avoid confusion, we recommend removing the Properties file.

TIP: Quarkus supports both the  `yml` and `yaml` file extensions.

> // include::modules/proc_using-nested-object-configuration-with-yaml.adoc[leveloffset=+2]

Reviewer: Not sure why this is commented out?

[id="proc_using-nested-object-configuration-with-yaml"]

> 

Author: Updated. Thanks.

== Using nested object configuration with YAML

> In a YAML configuration file, you can define a nested class inside an existing class to set configuration properties for your {project-name} application.

Reviewer: I'm not sure `class` is the right word here? But I'm not very familiar with YAML terminology.

Reviewer 3: Probably nested objects / elements.

Author: Updated it to element. Thanks!

      "io.quarkus.category":
        level: INFO
----
+
Similarly to using the comments in the `application.properties` file, you can use comments to describe your configuration properties in YAML format.
+
[NOTE]
====
Always use spaces to indent the properties in your YAML configuration file.
YAML does not support using tabs for indentation.
====

// CREATE include::modules/conc_configuration-profiles-with-yaml.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
[id="conc_configuration-profiles-with-yaml"]
== Configuration profiles with YAML

You can use xref:config-reference.adoc#profiles[profiles] in YAML.

Because YAML does not support names that start with `%`, you must enclose the names of configuration keys between double quotes.

For example, in `application.yaml`, you must use `"%dev"` or `"%test"` as the configuration keys to identify properties that you want to your Quarkus project to use when you build and run it using using the development or test profiles.

.Example `application.yaml` with production and development profiles
[source, yaml]
----
quarkus:
  http:
    port: 8081

"%dev":
    quarkus:
        http:
          port: 8082
----

> Quarkus runs the production profile by default. With the preceding example, if you don't specify a profile, the HTTP port number is `8081`. If you enable the development profile, the HTTP port number is `8082`.

Reviewer 3: I would probably refer to `prod` and `dev` profiles. Profile activation is not only specified by the use (as the text seems to suggest with: "if you don't specify a profile". For instance, if you run quarkus in dev mode, the default profile is `dev`.

Author: I'd like to find out more about what you mean. If you don't mind, I'll book a 15-minute meeting to talk.

The YAML configuration also supports profile-aware files. In this case, properties for a specific profile may reside in
an `application-{profile}.yaml` named file. The previous example may be expressed as:

.application.yaml
[source, yaml]
----
quarkus:
  http:
    port: 8081
----

.application-development.yaml
[source, yaml]
----
quarkus:
  http:
    port: 8082

> ----

Reviewer 3: You probably mean `application-dev.yaml`.

Author: Updated. Thanks.

// include::modules/proc_setting-custom-configuration-profiles-with-yaml.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
[id="proc_setting-custom-configuration-profiles-with-yaml"]
== Setting custom configuration profiles with YAML

With {project-name}, you can set configuration properties and values specific to your application's different configuration profiles.
You can start your application with a specific profile to access a particular configuration.
This procedure shows how you can configure a specific profile in YAML format.

.Prerequisites

* You have a {project-name} Maven project configured to use a PostgreSQL data source with a JDBC data source driver.
* You have the `quarkus-jdbc-postgresql` and `quarkus-config-yaml` extensions as dependencies in your project's `pom.xml` file.

.Procedure

. Open the `src/main/resources/application.yaml` configuration file.

. To set a profile-dependent configuration, add the profile name before defining the key-value pairs by using the `"%<profile_name>"` syntax.
Ensure that you place the profile name inside quotation marks.
+
[TIP]
====
In YAML, you must place all strings that begin with a special character inside quotation marks.
====
+

> In the following example, the PostgreSQL database is configured to be available at the `jdbc:postgresql://localhost:5432/some-database` URL when you start your {project-name} application in development mode:

Reviewer 3: I agree with the redundancy.

> In the following example, the PostgreSQL database is configured to be available at the `jdbc:postgresql://localhost:5432/some-database` URL when you start your {project-name} application in development mode:

Author: Updated. Thanks.

+
.src/main/resources/application.yaml
[source,yaml]
----
"%dev":
  # Properties that configure the JDBC data source driver of your PostgreSQL data source
  quarkus:
    datasource:
      url: jdbc:postgresql://localhost:5432/some-database
      driver: org.postgresql.Driver
      username: quarkus
      password: quarkus
----

// include::modules/con_property-expressions.adoc[leveloffset=+1]
[id="con_property-expressions"]
== Property expressions

Property expressions are combinations of property references and plain text strings that you can use to substitute values of properties in your configuration.

Much like a variable, you can use a property expression in {project-name} to substitute a configuration property value instead of hardcoding it.

> A property expression is resolved when `java.util.Properties` reads the property's value from a configuration source in your application.

Author: @gsmet I'll take your lead on this one. 
My read on this statement is that `java.util.Properties` loads properties and values from the source or sources we provide, such as `application.yaml` or `application.properties`. 
Is that correct?

> A property expression is resolved when `java.util.Properties` reads the property's value from a configuration source in your application.

Author: Maybe "config system"

> A property expression is resolved when `java.util.Properties` reads the property's value from a configuration source in your application.

Author: Use "ordinal"

> A property expression is resolved when `java.util.Properties` reads the property's value from a configuration source in your application.

Author: In consultation with @radcortez, I updated this to:
`A property expression is resolved when the configuration system reads the property's value from a configuration source in your application.`

If a configuration property is read from your configuration at compile time, the property expression is also resolved at compile time.
If the configuration property is overridden at runtime, its value is resolved at runtime.

You can resolve property expressions by using more than one configuration source.
This means that you can use the value of a property in one configuration source to expand a property expression that you use in another.

> If the value of a property in an expression cannot be resolved, and you do not set a default value for the expression, your application encounters a `NoSuchElementException`.

Author: Thanks for your comments. We discussed and agreed to keep this content.

== Example usage of property expressions using a YAML file

This section shows examples of using property expressions to achieve flexibility when configuring your {project-name} application.

.Example `application.yaml` file
[source,properties,options="nowrap"]
----
mach: 3
x:
  factor: 2.23694

display:
  mach: ${mach}
  unit:
    name: "mph"
    factor: ${x.factor}
----

[NOTE]
====
You can reference nested properties by using the `.` (dot) separator, as in `{x.factor}`.
====

.Additional resources

* For more information about property expressions, see xref:con_property-expressions[Property expressions].
// * For an example of property expressions using a properties file, see link:{URL_CONFIGURATION_QUARKUS}#ref_example-usage-of-property-expressions_quarkus-configuration-guide[Example usage of property expressions]. // TBD update and enable this ^ link later when this guide becomes available

// include::modules/con_external-application-yaml-file-for-configuring-properties-at-runtime.adoc[leveloffset=+1]
[id="con_external-application-yaml-file-for-configuring-properties-at-runtime"]
== External application.yaml file for configuring properties at runtime

> To configure your application properties at runtime, add your `application.yaml` file to the `config` directory.

Reviewer 3: `application.properties` mention.

Author: Use a "application configuration" not "properties"

Author: Updated. Thanks.
